Welcome to Wikipedia From today's featured article Hualca Hualca is a 6,025-metre-high (19,767 ft) extinct volcano in the Andes of southern Peru. It is part of the Peruvian segment of the Central Volcanic Zone, one of several volcanic belts in the Andes. It lies about 70 kilometres (43 mi) northwest of Arequipa and is part of a north–south chain that includes the volcanoes Ampato and Sabancaya, the last of which has been historically active. Hualca Hualca features a wide amphitheatre-like structure on the northern flank, which was created by a gigantic landslide during the Pleistocene. After the collapse, renewed volcanic activity built a new summit and several lava dome complexes within the collapse scar. After the cessation of volcanic activity, glaciers eroded the volcano and formed multiple moraines. The present-day volcano is covered by glaciers, and during the Last Glacial Maximum, glaciers advanced to low altitudes. There are hot springs and geysers north of the mountain, and the magma chambers of Sabancaya are located below Hualca Hualca. (Full article...) Did you know ... In the news On this day May 4: Youth Day in China; Literary Day in Taiwan; Star Wars Day Today's featured picture The Greensburg tornado was a large and devastating tornado that moved through Kiowa County, Kansas, on the evening of May 4, 2007, amid a tornado outbreak across the central United States, causing catastrophic damage to the town of Greensburg. The tornado tracked 28.8 miles (46.3 kilometers) through the area, killing at least eleven people and injuring sixty-three others. The tornado was the first to be rated EF5 on the enhanced Fujita scale after the retirement of the original Fujita scale in the United States in 2007. This photograph, taken for the Federal Emergency Management Agency, shows the destroyed town center of Greensburg on May 16, twelve days after the tornado struck. Photograph credit: Greg Henshall Other areas of Wikipedia Wikipedia's sister projects Wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer projects: Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English. Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below.