Huge gaps in article This article is missing major concepts. For example, there is no mention of page rank (!) or the receiver operating characteristic in evaluation, or multimedia IR. I agree precision/recall -- ROC -- evaluation might do better in a separate page. 67.101.41.94 (talk) 18:04, 10 July 2008 (UTC)[reply] A very major issue of this article is the fact that the second half of information retrieval is completely ignored: navigation (or browsing). A huge number of IR studies even show that navigation is by far the more important retrieval method. As a hybrid method, faceted search/navigation is also missing. Information retrieval is not the same as search! Novoid (talk) 16:09, 20 August 2012 (UTC)[reply] If you look at the study of information retrieval (e.g., conferences like the ACM Special Interest Group on Information Retrieval), you'll see that navigation and browsing don't get that much attention. I happen to be passionate about Human–computer information retrieval myself, but I think the content in this entry is fairly representative of the field. There are gaps, but I wouldn't call them huge. Dtunkelang (talk) 13:32, 21 August 2012 (UTC)[reply] Break IR down into subfields One thing I missed when I read this article was that information retrieval was not broken down into smaller subfields. It might be helpful to break this field down when developing the article further. Nybbles 10:29, 17 November 2006 (UTC)[reply] Glimpse / Webglimpse They are listed in open-source IR systems but according to their respective websites, their licenses do not seem to be open-source anymore. I don't know if they were open-source or not in the past, so I didn't remove them. Maybe someone with more knowledge on the subject could take care of the issue ? --Lastrainson 09:57, 5 September 2007 (UTC)[reply] New article request Hi there, I'd like to suggest a new article on the full history of information handling/management/techonology (details). I'm not knowledgeable enough to do it myself, but contributors here probably are. Thanks, JackyR | Talk 18:04, 4 December 2007 (UTC)[reply] Information scent Also add an article about information scent, as also noted on information foraging. Jidanni (talk) 18:35, 18 February 2008 (UTC)[reply] Term Discrimination I am going to start a new page on TermDiscrimination. I am a noob, so can some one give me some pointers on how to get this article linked to? Dspattison (talk) 18:29, 7 January 2008 (UTC)[reply] ASIS&T Award of Merit The ASIS&T Award of Merit, established in 1964 by the Delaware Valley Chapter, is now the Society's highest honor, bestowed annually to an individual who has made a noteworthy contribution to the field of information science, including the expression of new ideas, the creation of new devices, the development of better techniques and outstanding service to the profession of information science. The Award of Merit is sponsored directory by the Society. Past recipients of the Award of Merit: Cited by --KYPark (talk) 19:22, 7 November 2009 (UTC)[reply] Major figures The first two, Bayes and Shannon, were not contributing to information retrieval (hence rather irrelevant) but statistical inference in general. The next two, Luhn and Salton, were frontal, computational and experimental, helplessly suffering from lack of decent relevant IR theories. The rest are Cambridge alumni or affiliates. They were especially keen on statistical approaches, which make up a part of what IR is all about as an average science. The keyword web and the citation web are the two driving wheels of IR, not to mention any information search or research as well as (esp. new) encyclopedism. Hence the pivotal role of hypertext in principle and practice, around which a variety of statistical and computational methods may center. Frankly, the major figures, as biased as above, have little to do with such a central role obvious since late 1970s. --KYPark (talk) 21:21, 7 November 2009 (UTC)[reply] Question answering The question answering article begins "In information retrieval, question answering (QA) is the task of automatically answering a question posed in natural language." Yet there is no mention of question answering in this article. pgr94 (talk) 17:49, 21 June 2010 (UTC)[reply] Graphic Help There's a little mistake in adaptation of Kuropka's categorization. It should be "Binary Independence", instead of "Binary Interdependence". I don't know how to edit this part (I'm pretty new to this and it's a graphic). — Preceding unsigned comment added by 186.176.147.82 (talk) 02:42, 13 February 2013 (UTC)[reply] Merger proposal I propose that Webometrics be merged into this article, or one of its peers which tackles Web specific information retrieval metrics. The article seems slim to me. It seems poorly referenced, with many researchers appearing in more than one reference at the same time. Most of the see-also links seem to be supporting the article, rather than leading to more information. The article also appears to link only to the kinds of other articles, which I now gather it should be merged into. Its prime content also has to do with "web impact", which is a form of information retrieval metric; an "impact factor". As such, please consider Webometrics for merge into this article, and others near it, as the case may be. Decoy (talk) 20:20, 3 June 2015 (UTC)[reply] Deletion nomination for Gain (information retrieval) The article Gain (information retrieval) has been nominated for deletion at Wikipedia:Articles for deletion/Gain (information retrieval). As no one has yet commented on the nomination, I'm posting this message here in hopes of attracting editors familiar with the subject matter. —Psychonaut (talk) 08:47, 16 November 2015 (UTC)[reply] External links modified Hello fellow Wikipedians, I have just modified 3 external links on Information retrieval. Please take a moment to review my edit. If you have any questions, or need the bot to ignore the links, or the page altogether, please visit this simple FaQ for additional information. I made the following changes: When you have finished reviewing my changes, you may follow the instructions on the template below to fix any issues with the URLs. This message was posted before February 2018. After February 2018, "External links modified" talk page sections are no longer generated or monitored by InternetArchiveBot. No special action is required regarding these talk page notices, other than regular verification using the archive tool instructions below. Editors have permission to delete these "External links modified" talk page sections if they want to de-clutter talk pages, but see the RfC before doing mass systematic removals. This message is updated dynamically through the template {{source check}} (last update: 5 June 2024). Cheers.—InternetArchiveBot (Report bug) 21:50, 13 November 2017 (UTC)[reply] Focus is too narrow I think this aspect could do with more fleshing out, with regard to the processes involved and as subtopic of library or information science. The article seems to be heavily focussed on how and what computers do, rather than the principles and key elements behind making the information retrievable. I'm just going to add a source in Further reading for now, as a starting point for further expansion. Laterthanyouthink (talk) 08:11, 3 May 2020 (UTC)[reply] Reference Zhu, Mu (2004). "Recall, Precision and Average Precision" outdated It seemed difficult to find the reference mentioned above (which is unfortunate, as the equation referencing it is in turn referenced by scikit-learn, a commonly used implementation). According to Mr. Zhu, If you are looking for an early working paper, "Recall, Precision, and Average Precision", cited by an article on "Information Retrieval" from Wikipedia, please refer to and/or cite this published paper instead. Proposed merge of List of information retrieval libraries into Information retrieval Would probably be better as a section than as a standalone list. Akaibu (talk) 14:15, 17 October 2024 (UTC)[reply] Wiki Education assignment: INFO505 Foundations of Information Science This article is currently the subject of a Wiki Education Foundation-supported course assignment, between 15 January 2025 and 6 May 2025. Further details are available on the course page. Student editor(s): Rbdota23 (article contribs). Peer reviewers: MSIS student, Shahmaty, StreamunrealGlow. — Assignment last updated by GardenMoth25 (talk) 18:05, 16 April 2025 (UTC)[reply] Proposed addition of SPLADE into the article With NLPs and LLMs coming into picture. The space of information retrieval is changing rapidly. So I would like to add a section for SPLADE (Sparse Lexical and Expansion Model) here. SPLADE is a type neural retrieval model that does sparse vector representations for queries and documents. The source I'm using is arvix. Rbdota23 (talk) 23:38, 12 March 2025 (UTC)[reply]