This page allows users to search multiple sources for a book given a 10- or 13-digit International Standard Book Number. Spaces and dashes in the ISBN do not matter. This page links to catalogs of libraries, booksellers, and other book sources where you will be able to search for the book by its International Standard Book Number (ISBN). Online text Google Books and Amazon.com may be helpful if you want to verify citations in Wikipedia articles, because they often let you search an online version of the book for specific words or phrases, or you can browse through the book (although for copyright reasons the entire book is usually not available). At the Open Library (part of the Internet Archive) you can borrow and read entire books online. Online databases Subscription eBook databases Libraries Worldwide Africa Nigeria South Africa Zimbabwe Central America and the Caribbean Barbados Guatemala Jamaica Mexico Trinidad and Tobago Canada Public libraries Universities and colleges United States Public libraries by state Alabama Alaska California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Missouri Nebraska New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Washington state Wisconsin Universities and colleges South America Argentina Brazil Colombia Ecuador Asia Bangladesh China, People's Republic Hong Kong, S.A.R. of China India Indonesia Iran Israel Japan Korea Malaysia Philippines Universities and colleges Other libraries Singapore Taiwan, Republic of China Thailand Australasia and Oceania Australia Public libraries Academic libraries New Zealand Public libraries Academic libraries Europe Austria Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Croatia Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Luxembourg Montenegro Netherlands Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey United Kingdom Public libraries Universities Bookselling and swapping Price comparison sites Find your book on a site that compiles results from other online sites: Search many booksellers These sites allow you to search the catalogs of many individual booksellers: Individual booksellers Book-swapping websites Non-English book sources If the book you are looking for is in a language other than English, you might find it helpful to look at the equivalent pages on other Wikipedias, linked below – they are more likely to have sources appropriate for that language. Find other editions The WorldCat xISBN tool for finding other editions is no longer available. However, there is often a "view all editions" link on the results page from an ISBN search. Google books often lists other editions of a book and related books under the "about this book" link. You can convert between 10 and 13 digit ISBNs with these tools: Find on Wikipedia See also Get free access to research! Research tools and services Outreach Get involved